── SEO / METADATA BLOCK (for CMS / Next.js <head>, not rendered as body copy) ──
title: "Sri Vakreshvara Pandita: The One Wing of Lord Chaitanya | Life, Lila & Lila Sthali"
meta_title: "Vakreshvara Pandita – Life, Pastimes &
Lila Sthali | ISKCON Thiruvanmiyur"
meta_description: "Discover Sri Vakreshvara Pandita, the ecstatic dancer of Lord Chaitanya who danced 72 hours in sankirtana. Explore his life, the 'wing' pastime, Devananda Pandita's deliverance, and lila sthalis in Guptipara, Puri & Mayapur."
slug: "/blog/sri-vakreshvara-pandita-wing-of-lordchaitanya"
canonical_url: "https://www.[yourdomain].org/blog/sri-vakreshvara-pandita-wingof-lord-chaitanya"
author: "Compiled based on the teachings of His Divine Grace Vishwa Guru Srila Prabhupada”
publisher: "HKM Chennai"
date_published: "2026-07-01"
date_modified: "2026-07-01"
primary_keyword: "Vakreshvara Pandita"
secondary_keywords:
"Vakreshvara Pandita lila sthali"
"who was Vakreshvara Pandita"
"Lord Chaitanya one wing pastime"
"Vakreshvara Pandita Guptipara"
"Kashi Mishra house Gambhira Puri"
"Srivasa Angan Mayapur"
"Tungavidya gopi Vakreshvara"
"Gaudiya Vaishnava associates of Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu"
content_type: "Devotee biography / pilgrimage guide"
reading_time: "9–11 min"
schema_types: ["Article", "FAQPage", "BreadcrumbList"]
og_image_alt: "Illustration of Vakreshvara Pandita
Sri Vakreshvara Pandita: The Wing of Lord Chaitanya
Glorifying the ecstatic devotee-dancer who danced for seventy-two hours in the sankirtana of Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu
It is well past midnight in Srivasa Pandita's courtyard. Lord Chaitanya is singing. Vakreshvara Pandita has been dancing, without pause, for two full days and nights. When he finally falls at the Lord's feet, breathless, he does not ask to rest — he begs for ten thousand celestial Gandharvas to sing so that he can keep dancing. Mahaprabhu's reply becomes one of the most tender lines in all of Vaishnava literature: "I have only one wing like you, but if I had another, certainly I would fly in the sky."
That single exchange tells you almost everything about who Vakreshvara Pandita was.
Table of Contents
1. Introduction
2. Birth and Early Life in Guptipara
3. An Eternal Associate: Aniruddha Incarnate
4. Glorified Among the Learned Devotees
5. The Seventy-Two Hour Dance and the "Wing" Pastime
6. The Deliverance of Devananda Pandita
7. Life in Jagannatha Puri
8. Seva at the House of Kashi Mishra
9. Disciplic Legacy
10. Lila Sthali: Places to Remember Vakreshvara Pandita
11. What Vakreshvara Pandita Teaches Us
12. Frequently Asked Questions
Quick Facts (at a glance)
--- TABLE START ---
Identity | Eternal associate of Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu; incarnation of Aniruddha (per Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika)
Vraja identity | The gopi Tungavidya, among the ashta-sakhis, expert in music and dance
Birthplace | Guptipara, near Triveni, Hooghly district, West Bengal
Known for | Dancing continuously for 72 hours in sankirtana; called by Mahaprabhu "My one wing"
Guru-disciple line | Disciple: Gopal Guru Goswami → disciple: Dhyanachandra Goswami (author of Dhyana-chandra-paddhati)
Principal lila sthalis | Guptipara (birthplace) · Srivasa Angan, Mayapur (72-hour dance) · Gambhira / Kashi Mishra's house, Puri (seva & residence)
--- TABLE END ---
Introduction
Among the eternal associates of Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, there is one devotee whose very body became an instrument of Krishna's ecstasy — Vakreshvara Pandita. Srila Prabhupada describes him as "the fifth branch of the tree" of Lord Chaitanya's associates (Chaitanya-charitamrita, Adi 10.17), so dear to the Lord that Mahaprabhu Himself compared Vakreshvara Pandita to His own missing wing.
What follows is his story — from his birth in a Bengal town already steeped in Vaishnava culture, to his identity as an eternal Vrindavan gopi, to the pastimes and places that keep his memory alive today.
Birth and Early Life in Guptipara
Sri Vakreshvara Pandita took birth in the village of Guptipara, near Triveni, in Bengal. From his youth he was expert in singing and dancing — gifts that were not mere artistic talent but instruments of pure devotional ecstasy, later to be fully revealed in the presence of Lord Chaitanya.
Guptipara itself has long been a stronghold of Vaishnava culture on the banks of the Hooghly River. The town is home to the historic Brindaban Chandra Math, a walled quadrangle of four terracotta temples — dedicated to Chaitanya-Nityananda, Radha-Krishna-Jagannath (Brindabanchandra), Rama-Sita-Lakshmana-Hanuman, and Radha-Krishna (Krishnachandra) — and to one of Bengal's oldest and tallest ratha-yatra chariots, second in length only to the Ratha-yatra of Puri. The area was historically known as a center of Sanskrit scholarship and Vaishnava devotion, a fitting birthplace for a devotee whose own learning would later be overshadowed only by his ecstatic love for Krishna.
An Eternal Associate: Aniruddha Incarnate
Srila Prabhupada explains the transcendental identity of this great devotee in his purport to Chaitanya-charitamrita Adi 10.17:
"In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika (71) it is stated that Vakresvara Pandita was an incarnation of Aniruddha, one of the quadruple expansions of Visnu (Vasudeva, Sankarsana, Aniruddha and Pradyumna)."
In the Dhyana-chandra-paddhati, written by Dhyanachandra Goswami — the disciple of Vakreshvara Pandita's own disciple, Gopal Guru Goswami — it is revealed that in Krishna's eternal pastimes of Vrindavan, Vakreshvara Pandita was the gopi Tungavidya, celebrated among the ashta-sakhis for her expertise in music and dance. That same eternal associate of Radha and Krishna appeared in Gaura-lila as Vakreshvara Pandita, to relish and distribute the ecstasy of the sankirtana movement.
The Dhyana-chandra-paddhati also records his appearance and disappearance tithis: he appeared on Krishna Panchami (the fifth day of the waning moon) of the month of Ashadha, and concluded his earthly pastimes on Shukla Shashthi (the sixth day of the waxing moon), also in Ashadha — dates that, following the lunar calendar, shift each year in the Gregorian reckoning.
Glorified Among the Learned Devotees
Sri Chaitanya-charitamrita records Vakreshvara Pandita among the most exalted and learned devotees of the Lord. As Srila Prabhupada translates in Adi 6.49–50:
"Srivasa, Haridasa, Ramadasa, Gadadhara, Murari, Mukunda, Candrasekhara and Vakresvara are all glorious and are all learned scholars, but the sentiment of servitude to Lord Caitanya makes them mad in ecstasy."
Great scholarship bowed before pure devotional madness — and Vakreshvara Pandita embodied this madness of love more visibly than almost any other associate.
The Seventy-Two Hour Dance and the “Wing” Pastime
The most celebrated pastime of Vakreshvara Pandita's life took place in the house of Srivasa Pandita, where Lord Chaitanya engaged in dramatic performances of sankirtana. Srila Prabhupada narrates this pastime in Chaitanya-charitamrita:
"Vakresvara Pandita, the fifth branch of the tree, was a very dear servant of Lord Caitanya's. He could dance with constant ecstasy for seventy-two hours." (Chaitanya-charitamrita, Adi 10.17)
Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu Himself sang while Vakreshvara Pandita danced without cessation. Overwhelmed, Vakreshvara Pandita fell at the lotus feet of the Lord and made a bold and loving request:
"O Candramukha! Please give me ten thousand Gandharvas. Let them sing as I dance, and then I will be greatly happy." (Chaitanya-charitamrita, Adi 10.19)
Srila Prabhupada explains in his purport that the Gandharvas are the celestial singers of Gandharvaloka, capable of singing continuously for days — and so Vakreshvara Pandita, in his insatiable hunger to dance in the Lord's service, wished for their unending song. (Adi 10.19, purport)
Lord Chaitanya's reply is among the most tender exchanges recorded between the Lord and His devotee:
"I have only one wing like you, but if I had another, certainly I would fly in the sky!" (Chaitanya-charitamrita, Adi 10.20)
Mahaprabhu compared Himself to a bird with only one wing — Vakreshvara Pandita being that wing — unable to fly without his ecstatic dancing to carry Him aloft in sankirtana bliss.
The Deliverance of Devananda Pandita
Vakreshvara Pandita's mercy was not confined to dancing before the Lord; it extended to the deliverance of fallen souls. Devananda Pandita, a renowned scholar of Srimad-Bhagavatam residing in Kuliya (present-day Navadvipa), had committed a grave offense: when Srivasa Thakura wept in ecstasy while hearing his Bhagavatam recital, Devananda's own disciples drove Srivasa Thakura away, and Devananda made no protest.
When Lord Chaitanya later passed through Kuliya, He chastised Devananda severely for his Mayavadi interpretation of the Bhagavatam. At that time, Devananda had little faith in Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu as an incarnation of Krishna. But providence brought Vakreshvara Pandita as a guest to a devotee's house in Kuliya, across the Ganges from Nadia. One evening Vakreshvara Pandita performed kirtana and dance there for two praharas — some six hours — and Devananda, hearing the news, came to witness it. Seeing the visible symptoms of divine love manifest in Vakreshvara Pandita's dancing body, Devananda himself took up a cane to keep the gathering crowd from obstructing the ecstatic performance. When the dancing ended, Devananda offered dandavat pranams at Vakreshvara Pandita's feet, who blessed him simply: "May you attain devotion to Sri Krishna."
As Srila Prabhupada writes in Adi 10.77:
"Devananda Pandita was a professional reciter of Srimad-Bhagavatam, but by the mercy of Vakresvara Pandita and the grace of the Lord he understood the devotional interpretation of the Bhagavatam."
Later, when Lord Chaitanya returned to Nadia to see His mother and the Ganges, He personally told Devananda Pandita: "Because you have rendered service to Vakreshvara Pandita I consider you to be one of my own. Vakreshvara Pandita is completely empowered by the Lord." (Chaitanya-charitamrita, Adi 10.77 and purport)
This pastime teaches a central truth of Gaudiya Vaishnava philosophy — that service to a pure Vaishnava is the direct means of attaining the mercy of Krishna Himself.
Life in Jagannatha Puri
When Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu accepted sannyasa and took up residence in Jagannatha Puri, Vakreshvara Pandita was counted among His most intimate and permanent associates there. Srila Prabhupada writes that among these devotees, Paramananda Puri and Svarupa Damodara were the heart and soul of the Lord, and among the others were Gadadhara, Jagadananda, Sankara, Vakreshvara, Damodara Pandita, Thakura Haridasa, Raghunatha Vaidya, and Raghunatha dasa. (Chaitanya-charitamrita, Adi 10.124–126)
Chief dancer in the sankirtana parties. During the annual Ratha-yatra festival, Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu personally ordered Nityananda Prabhu, Advaita Acharya, Thakura Haridasa, and Vakreshvara Pandita to each dance in one of four kirtana parties. (Chaitanya-charitamrita, Madhya-lila 13.35) Two brothers, Madhava Ghosha and Vasudeva Ghosha, joined Vakreshvara Pandita's party as responsive singers, with Vakreshvara Pandita as the dancer. (Chaitanya-charitamrita, Madhya-lila 13.43)
In the Gundicha temple courtyard. Srila Prabhupada records that Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu would sometimes engage Vakreshvara Pandita and other devotees in chanting and dancing, performing sankirtana three times daily — morning, noon, and evening — in the yard of the Gundicha temple. (Chaitanya-charitamrita, Madhya-lila 14.72)
In the water pastimes. In the gardens near the Gundicha temple, during the Vrindavana pastimes re-enacted there, a duel of throwing water took place between Raghava Pandita and Vakreshvara Pandita, one among several such playful exchanges among the devotees. (Chaitanya-charitamrita, Madhya-lila 14.82) On another occasion, the Lord personally ordered Vakreshvara Pandita to dance, and as he began, the Lord Himself began to sing. (Chaitanya-charitamrita, Madhya-lila 14.101)
Every day of Mahaprabhu's Puri pastimes. Vakreshvara Pandita is named among the devotees to whom Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu introduced Sanatana Gosvami (Chaitanya-charitamrita, Antya-lila 4.108–110), among those who danced with the Lord in the great sankirtana processions where he was again named chief dancer (Antya-lila 11.48, 11.64), and among those who danced in jubilation around the Lord's body as He passed in ecstasy (Antya-lila 11.67).
Seva at the House of Kashi Mishra
In Jagannatha Puri, Lord Chaitanya resided at the house of Kashi Mishra, the priest of the King. Srila Prabhupada notes in his purport to Adi 10.131 that this sacred house was later inherited by Vakreshvara Pandita himself, and thereafter by his disciple, Gopal Guru Goswami, who established there the worship of Sri Sri Radha-Kanta — a seva that continues to this day. (Chaitanya-charitamrita, Adi 10.131, purport)
Kashi Mishra served as rajguru to King Prataparudra, who gifted him a house with a large garden near the Jagannatha temple. Within it was a small, secluded room called the Gambhira — meaning "deep" or "hidden" — where Mahaprabhu spent the final twelve years of His manifest pastimes, absorbed in intense feelings of separation from Krishna. After Mahaprabhu's disappearance, Vakreshvara Pandita took up residence in the Gambhira and continued the seva of Sri Radha-Kanta received from Kashi Mishra, before entrusting it to Gopal Guru Goswami. Between 1538 and 1548, Gopal Guru renovated and expanded the temple, installing additional Deities of Radharani, Lalita Devi, and dancing Gauranga-Nityananda alongside Radha-Kanta — the same Deities worshiped there today at what is now known as Radhakanta Math. (Gaudiya History; "Gambhira – Kashi Mishra's House," radha.name; The Gaudiya Treasures of Bengal)
Disciplic Legacy
Vakreshvara Pandita's foremost disciple was Gopal Guru Goswami, who inherited both his spiritual mood and his seva at Kashi Mishra's house (Chaitanya-charitamrita, Adi 10.131, purport). Gopal Guru Goswami's own disciple, Dhyanachandra Goswami, authored the Dhyana-chandra-paddhati — a Gaudiya Vaishnava meditational text distinct from Chaitanya-charitamrita — through which the identity of Vakreshvara Pandita as Tungavidya gopi has been preserved for devotees. (Dhyana-chandra-paddhati, Dhyanachandra Goswami) Many disciples of Vakreshvara Pandita took root in Orissa, where they are honored as Gaudiya Vaishnavas though they are Oriyas by birth. (Gaudiya History, "Gopala Guru Goswami")
Lila Sthali: Places to Remember Vakreshvara Pandita
1. Guptipara, West Bengal — Birthplace
Guptipara lies on the eastern bank of the Hooghly River in the Hooghly district, roughly 60–80 km north of Kolkata, reachable by suburban train from Howrah or Sealdah to Guptipara railway station. Long a center of Sanskrit learning and Vaishnava devotion, the town today is known for the Brindaban Chandra Math temple complex, its terracotta shrines, and one of Bengal's grandest Ratha-yatra festivals — features that place Vakreshvara Pandita's birth within a landscape already steeped in devotional and scholarly culture centuries before his appearance.
2. Srivasa Angan, Sri Mayapur — Site of the 72-Hour Dance and the “Wing” Pastime
Srivasa Angan, the former homestead of Srivasa Thakura, stands close to the Yogapitha — Lord Chaitanya's birthplace — in present-day Sri Mayapur, Nadia district, West Bengal. Sri Chaitanya-charitamrita names it as one of four places where Lord Gaurahari eternally performs His pastimes, alongside Yogapitha, the site of Nityananda Prabhu's dancing, and Raghava Pandita's house. It was here, at the nightly closed-door sankirtana gatherings of Mahaprabhu's inner circle, that Vakreshvara Pandita's celebrated seventy-two-hour dance and the "one wing" exchange took place. A small temple today marks the site, with altars depicting the Maha-prakasha-lila (the Lord's revelation of His divine nature) and the Khol-Bhanga-Danga pastime, where kirtana instruments were broken by opponents of the sankirtana movement. It is an easy stop on any Mayapur parikrama, a short walk or auto-ride from ISKCON Sri Mayapur.
3. Gambhira (Kashi Mishra's House / Radhakanta Math), Jagannatha Puri, Odisha
Located in Bali Sahi, southeast of the Jagannatha temple on the way to Svargadvara, this site — also called Radhakanta Math — was Kashi Mishra's residence and the place where Mahaprabhu spent His last twelve years in a small room called the Gambhira. The room still preserves items said to be Mahaprabhu's kamandalu, wooden padukas, and quilt. After Vakreshvara Pandita inherited the seva here from Kashi Mishra, he passed it to his disciple Gopal Guru Goswami, who formally established Radhakanta Math and installed additional Deities. Located about a kilometer from the Jagannatha temple, it remains an active place of worship and darshan for pilgrims visiting Puri.
What Vakreshvara Pandita Teaches Us
Srila Prabhupada's presentation of Vakreshvara Pandita's life offers devotees several enduring lessons:
Devotion beyond scholarship. Though counted among the most learned associates of the Lord, it was not his scholarship but his ecstatic servitude that made him dear to Mahaprabhu.
The body as an instrument of bhakti. His dancing was not artistic performance but the direct manifestation of Krishna's presence within his heart — a living example that devotional service engages the whole being.
The power of Vaishnava association. The transformation of Devananda Pandita, a proud and offensive scholar, into a genuine devotee came about not through argument but through simple, humble association with a pure Vaishnava.
Humility despite empowerment. Though declared an incarnation of Aniruddha and completely empowered by Krishna, Vakreshvara Pandita remained a servant, dancing at the Lord's pleasure rather than seeking recognition.
Frequently Asked Questions
Who was Sri Vakreshvara Pandita?
Sri Vakreshvara Pandita was an intimate eternal associate of Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, renowned for his ability to dance in ecstasy for seventy-two continuous hours. He is identified in the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika as an incarnation of Aniruddha, and in Krishna's Vrindavan pastimes as the gopi Tungavidya.
What is the famous “wing” pastime of Vakreshvara Pandita?
After Vakreshvara Pandita danced ceaselessly for seventy-two hours while Lord Chaitanya sang, he begged the Lord for ten thousand Gandharvas to sing so he could dance without stopping. The Lord replied that Vakreshvara Pandita was like His one wing, and that with another such wing, He could fly in the sky.
How did Vakreshvara Pandita deliver Devananda Pandita?
Devananda Pandita, a scholar who had committed an offense against Srivasa Thakura, witnessed Vakreshvara Pandita's ecstatic kirtana and dancing one night in Kuliya. Moved by what he saw, Devananda became convinced of Lord Chaitanya's divinity and was freed from his offense, going on to explain Srimad-Bhagavatam according to pure devotional understanding.
Who was Vakreshvara Pandita's disciple?
His principal disciple was Gopal Guru Goswami, who inherited his seva at Kashi Mishra's house in Jagannatha Puri and established the worship of Sri Sri Radha-Kanta there.
Where are the lila sthalis of Vakreshvara Pandita located?
His three principal lila sthalis are Guptipara in West Bengal's Hooghly district (birthplace), Srivasa Angan in Sri Mayapur (site of the 72-hour dance), and the Gambhira / Radhakanta Math in Jagannatha Puri, Odisha (his later residence and seva).
Where is Vakreshvara Pandita's appearance/disappearance day observed?
The Dhyana-chandra-paddhati places his appearance on Krishna Panchami and his disappearance on Shukla Shashthi, both in the month of Ashadha. As with all Vaishnava commemorative days, the exact Gregorian date follows the lunar (tithi) calendar and shifts each year — please refer to the current Gaudiya Vaishnava calendar for this year's date.
Srila Prabhupada's ISKCON Thiruvanmiyur | Dakshina Dwaraka Dham, Chennai
Appendix — Notes on SEO & GEO Implementation
SEO Additions (front-matter block)
Title tag, meta description, canonical URL placeholder, slug, and keyword targets — fill in [yourdomain] before publishing.
Target keywords are built around actual search intent: name-based (“who was Vakreshvara Pandita”), pastime-based (“one wing pastime”), and location-based (“lila sthali”, “Guptipara”, “Gambhira Puri”, “Srivasa Angan”).
GEO (AI-search / answer-engine) Additions
A Quick Facts table at the top gives AI crawlers (Google AI Overviews, Perplexity, ChatGPT search, etc.) a clean, extractable summary block — the single highest-leverage GEO element on the page.
The FAQ section is phrased as direct question-answer pairs matching how people query AI assistants and voice search; pair this with FAQPage schema so it is eligible for rich results.
Each factual claim in the Lila Sthali section is self-contained and quotable in one or two sentences, favoring extraction into AI-generated answers.
Inline citations throughout signal source transparency, which several AI answer engines weight when selecting citations.
Structured Data (add to page <head> or via Next.js generateMetadata / JSON-LD script tag)
{  "@context": "https://schema.org",  "@type": "Article",  "headline": "Sri Vakreshvara Pandita: The One Wing of Lord Chaitanya",  "description": "The life, pastimes, and lila sthalis of Sri Vakreshvara Pandita, the ecstatic dancer-devotee of Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.",  "author": { "@type": "Organization", "name": "ISKCON Thiruvanmiyur" },  "publisher": { "@type": "Organization", "name": "ISKCON Thiruvanmiyur" },  "datePublished": "2026-07-01",  "dateModified": "2026-07-01",  "mainEntityOfPage": "https://www.[yourdomain].org/blog/sri-vakreshvara-pandita-wing-of-lord-chaitanya",  "image": "[hero image URL]"}
{  "@context": "https://schema.org",  "@type": "FAQPage",  "mainEntity": [    {      "@type": "Question",      "name": "Who was Sri Vakreshvara Pandita?",      "acceptedAnswer": {        "@type": "Answer",        "text": "Sri Vakreshvara Pandita was an intimate eternal associate of Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, renowned for dancing in ecstasy for seventy-two continuous hours, identified as an incarnation of Aniruddha and, in Krishna's Vrindavan pastimes, as the gopi Tungavidya."      }    },    {      "@type": "Question",      "name": "What is the famous 'wing' pastime of Vakreshvara Pandita?",      "acceptedAnswer": {        "@type": "Answer",        "text": "After dancing for seventy-two hours, Vakreshvara Pandita asked Lord Chaitanya for ten thousand Gandharvas to sing so he could keep dancing. The Lord replied that Vakreshvara Pandita was His one wing, and with another He could fly in the sky."      }    },    {      "@type": "Question",      "name": "Where are the lila sthalis of Vakreshvara Pandita located?",      "acceptedAnswer": {        "@type": "Answer",        "text": "His three principal lila sthalis are Guptipara in West Bengal (birthplace), Srivasa Angan in Sri Mayapur (site of the 72-hour dance), and the Gambhira/Radhakanta Math in Jagannatha Puri, Odisha."      }    }  ]}
Additional GEO/SEO Checklist for Implementation
Add descriptive alt text to every image (describe the scene, not just “Vakreshvara Pandita photo”).
Internal links: link “Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu,” “Srivasa Thakura,” “Gopal Guru Goswami,” and “Jagannatha Puri” to existing devotee/dham pages if available — builds topical authority and helps AI crawlers understand entity relationships.
Add a short (1–2 sentence) plain-language summary as the very first line of the page body — some AI crawlers weight the first ~150 words heavily.
If you maintain an llms.txt file for the site, add this page's URL and a one-line summary to it.
Ensure the page loads fast and is mobile-first (Core Web Vitals affect both traditional SEO and AI crawler rendering).
Submit the URL via Google Search Console after publishing so it is indexed promptly.
